README.md, before:

# Expense Tracking Project

## Set Up Machine
I am working on a Linux machine with Ubuntu 20.04.
Type ` lsb_release -a` to check your version.  My results are:

```
No LSB modules are available.
Distributor ID:	Ubuntu
Description:	Ubuntu 20.04.3 LTS
Release:	20.04
Codename:	focal
```

### Install required packages

You need to install the following packages, if they are not already installed:
1. Update system: Type `sudo apt-get update`
2. Upgrade system: Type `sudo apt-get upgrade`
3. Python3: Type `sudo apt-get upgrade python3`
4. Pip3: Type `sudo apt install -y python3-pip`
5. Virtualenv: Type `sudo apt-get install python3-venv`
6. PostgreSQL: Type `sudo apt install postgresql postgresql-contrib`
7. Git: Type `sudo apt install git-all`

### Set up PostgreSQL Database

1. Make sure postgreSQL service is running: Type `sudo service postgresql start`
2. Access postgreSQL: Type `sudo -u postgres psql postgres`
3. Set the password: Type `\password <password>` (for postgres; NOT user's password for new db)
4. Create database: Type `CREATE DATABASE <database name>;`
5. Connect to database: Type `\c <database name>`
6. Create a user: Type `CREATE USER <user> WITH PASSWORD '<user password>';`
7. Set encoding: Type `ALTER ROLE <user> SET client_encoding TO 'utf8';`
8. Set default transaction: Type `ALTER ROLE <user> SET default_transaction_isolation TO 'read committed';`
9. Set timezone: Type `ALTER ROLE <user> SET timezone TO 'EST';`
10. Grant permissions: Type `GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE <database name> TO <username>;`
11. Exit PostgreSQL: Type `\q`

## Set Up Project Directory

1. Type `mkdir django-expense` or any name for the directory you choose
2. Change into the newly created directory: Type `cd django-expense`
3. Type `python3 -m venv expense-venv` to create virtural environment
4. Activate virtual environment: Type `source expense-venv/bin/activate`
   NOTE:  Your will see `(expense-venv)` before your prompt
5. Clone this repository: Type `git clone https://github.com/MKing301/expenses.git`
6. Change into repository directory: Type `cd expenses`
7. Install required packages: Type `pip install -r requirements.txt`
8. Create environment variables file: Type `touch .env`
9. Add environment variables: Type `nano .env`
   NOTE: You can use your favorite text editor if you prefer, instead of nano

   a. Add the following lines to the .env files

   ```
   # Secret Key
   export SECRET_KEY="your secret key here"

   # Postgresql Database
   export DB_NAME="your database from above name here"
   export DB_USER="your database user name from above here"
   export DB_USER_PASSWORD="your database user password from above here"
   ```

   b. If using nano, type `CTRL + O` then `ENTER` to save, then `CTRL + X` to exit nano


## Migrate Changes Into The Database and Create Superuser

NOTE: Make sure your virtual environment is activated and you are in the project directory

1. Type `python manage.py makemigrations`
2. Type `python manage.py migrate`
3. Create superuser: Type `python manage.py createsuperuser` and follow prompts

## Run Django Project On Development Server

1. Type `python manage.py runserver`

You should see the following:

```
Watching for file changes with StatReloader
Performing system checks...

System check identified no issues (0 silenced).
February 02, 2022 - 21:35:23
Django version 4.0.2, using settings 'project.settings'
Starting development server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
Quit the server with CONTROL-C.
```

2. Open your browser and enter `http://127.0.0.1:8000/`

You should see **The installation worked successfully! Congratulations!** in the middle of the screen.

## Stop Django Project

1. Type `CTRL + C`

NOTE: You can deactivate your virtual environment by typing `deactivate`, then `ENTER`

Commit message:

Update readme to include collectstatic

README.md, after:

# Expense Tracking Project

## Set Up Machine
I am working on a Linux machine with Ubuntu 20.04.
Type ` lsb_release -a` to check your version.  My results are:

```
No LSB modules are available.
Distributor ID:	Ubuntu
Description:	Ubuntu 20.04.3 LTS
Release:	20.04
Codename:	focal
```

### Install required packages

You need to install the following packages, if they are not already installed:
1. Update system: Type `sudo apt-get update`
2. Upgrade system: Type `sudo apt-get upgrade`
3. Python3: Type `sudo apt-get upgrade python3`
4. Pip3: Type `sudo apt install -y python3-pip`
5. Virtualenv: Type `sudo apt-get install python3-venv`
6. PostgreSQL: Type `sudo apt install postgresql postgresql-contrib`
7. Git: Type `sudo apt install git-all`

### Set up PostgreSQL Database

1. Make sure postgreSQL service is running: Type `sudo service postgresql start`
2. Access postgreSQL: Type `sudo -u postgres psql postgres`
3. Set the password: Type `\password <password>` (for postgres; NOT user's password for new db)
4. Create database: Type `CREATE DATABASE <database name>;`
5. Connect to database: Type `\c <database name>`
6. Create a user: Type `CREATE USER <user> WITH PASSWORD '<user password>';`
7. Set encoding: Type `ALTER ROLE <user> SET client_encoding TO 'utf8';`
8. Set default transaction: Type `ALTER ROLE <user> SET default_transaction_isolation TO 'read committed';`
9. Set timezone: Type `ALTER ROLE <user> SET timezone TO 'EST';`
10. Grant permissions: Type `GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE <database name> TO <username>;`
11. Exit PostgreSQL: Type `\q`

## Set Up Project Directory

1. Type `mkdir django-expense` or any name for the directory you choose
2. Change into the newly created directory: Type `cd django-expense`
3. Type `python3 -m venv expense-venv` to create virtural environment
4. Activate virtual environment: Type `source expense-venv/bin/activate`
   NOTE:  Your will see `(expense-venv)` before your prompt
5. Clone this repository: Type `git clone https://github.com/MKing301/expenses.git`
6. Change into repository directory: Type `cd expenses`
7. Install required packages: Type `pip install -r requirements.txt`
8. Create environment variables file: Type `touch .env`
9. Add environment variables: Type `nano .env`
   NOTE: You can use your favorite text editor if you prefer, instead of nano

   a. Add the following lines to the .env files

   ```
   # Secret Key
   export SECRET_KEY="your secret key here"

   # Postgresql Database
   export DB_NAME="your database from above name here"
   export DB_USER="your database user name from above here"
   export DB_USER_PASSWORD="your database user password from above here"
   ```

   b. If using nano, type `CTRL + O` then `ENTER` to save, then `CTRL + X` to exit nano


## Migrate Changes Into The Database and Create Superuser

NOTE: Make sure your virtual environment is activated and you are in the project directory

1. Type `python manage.py makemigrations`
2. Type `python manage.py migrate`
3. Create superuser: Type `python manage.py createsuperuser` and follow prompts

## Load Static files

NOTE: Make sure your virtual environment is activated and you are in the project directory

Type `python manage.py collectstatic`

You will see something similar to the following:

```
You have requested to collect static files at the destination
location as specified in your settings.

This will overwrite existing files!
Are you sure you want to do this?

Type 'yes' to continue, or 'no' to cancel:
```

Type `yes` then `ENTER`

1 static file copied to 'path/to/static/root/dir', 129 unmodified.

## Run Django Project On Development Server

1. Type `python manage.py runserver`

You should see the following:

```
Watching for file changes with StatReloader
Performing system checks...

System check identified no issues (0 silenced).
February 02, 2022 - 21:35:23
Django version 4.0.2, using settings 'project.settings'
Starting development server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
Quit the server with CONTROL-C.
```

2. Open your browser and enter `http://127.0.0.1:8000/`

You should see **The installation worked successfully! Congratulations!** in the middle of the screen.

## Stop Django Project

1. Type `CTRL + C`

NOTE: You can deactivate your virtual environment by typing `deactivate`, then `ENTER`
